So thanks for coming to the
Porting UNIX Apps to Mac OS X talk.
How many of you were
here for Ernie's talk?
Ask it the other way around.
How many of you were not
here for the last talk?
Okay, good.
Enough of you.
There's some overlap between
what Ernie talked about and
what we're going to talk about.
So we're going to take this a little
bit quicker than we had originally
planned to spare those of you that have
already heard a lot of this content.
There will be plenty of
time for Q&A at the end,
and we have some pretty
experienced people porting people.
So keep the questions in
mind for the end of the talk.
My name is Jason Evans.
I'll be giving the
first half of the talk,
and Dave Zarzycki will
be doing the second half.
We work in the BSD Technologies Group,
which is part of the
Core Operating Systems Group.
We spend a lot of time porting
UNIX applications to OS X,
maintaining them,
feeding patches back to the original
maintainers of that software
when it's a fitting thing to do.
So, we're going to talk about some
of the gotchas that you'll run
into when porting applications.
Not really going to talk about the
normal process you would run into,
you know,
go through in porting a UNIX application.
Going to talk about the things
that you would stumble on
with OS X that are unique.
We're not going to talk about drivers.
There are other sessions this week.
We'll refer to some of those
at the end of this talk.
Graphical user interfaces.
Not going to talk about that here either.
There are other sessions
you should check out.
You're highly encouraged to,
if you have a graphical application,
say that uses X,
you're encouraged to go ahead
and use the Aqua frameworks.
Check that out.
Multimedia we won't be talking about.
Printing, that doesn't affect a
number of UNIX applications.
There's another session I think tomorrow
afternoon that you should check out.
We're not going to talk about
font handling and pretty much
anything you can see we're not
going to talk about in this session.
So.
Brief history.
Ernie gave some history on this.
A little bit of background kind
of from a technical perspective.
Next took, back in the early 90s,
they took BSD 4.3 from
Berkeley and they took Mach 2.5
and they merged that together,
made a number of modifications,
enhancements, and they maintained that
over a number of years.
When Mac OS X development
work was started on that,
they wanted to sort of refresh that.
So they took the final
drop from Berkeley,
the 4.4 BSD Lite, Lite 2 distribution,
and then Mach 3.0.
They merged that together,
merged some of the next
modifications into that,
and that was sort of the
foundation for Mac OS X.
The software comes from a
number of different places,
and since then, we've also taken some of
the technology that's been
developed by the FreeBSD project.
We've been working on some
of the features that we've
been working on in the past,
in FreeBSD 3.2 and more
recently in 4.4 and 4.5.
It's kind of hit and miss, though,
which parts came from which versions.
Here's a basic system diagram from
the perspective of someone that's
actually porting a UNIX application.
A lot of the higher-level frameworks
are left off in this diagram.
This is really kind of the low-level
command line view of things.
So your application will
typically sit on top of libraries,
which you're surely familiar with,
and frameworks,
which are a conglomeration
of headers and libraries.
It's kind of a neat little
packaging for an integrated
development environment programming.
You'll potentially run into some of this
if you're using the printing framework,
for example.
You hear of frameworks in OS X.
That's basically what they are,
and there's some special
flags that you pass to the
compiler in order to use those.
Under that, we have libsystem,
which is a conglomeration of a
number of low-level system libraries.
libc, libm, which is the math library,
libinfo, which gives you net info access.
About a half dozen libraries in total.
We merge those all together, essentially,
to reduce the amount of
shared library overhead.
There's, of course,
a certain amount of overhead
for every shared library that
you load into your application.
And pretty much every application
uses most of these libraries,
and so we reduce the overhead,
and it gives us a pretty
significant overall system savings.
At the bottom level, you have the kernel,
and you can see in this diagram,
BSD and Mach are side-by-side.
We don't actually have a
microkernel architecture.
We have the APIs for both of those,
but they are merged together
into the same address space.
I/O Kit is our driver framework.
The I/O Kit is essentially
how you would write drivers.
It's substantially different
from typical Unix drivers.
So there are other sessions
that talk about that in detail.
OS X comes from a number
of different places.
The typical distribution that
you'd be familiar with is the
one that comes on most systems.
It comes with the
Mac OS X client software.
We also have a server product which
has some enhanced management tools,
also has a few extra pieces of software.
This really isn't going to be that
important to you unless you find
yourself developing on Mac OS X's server.
Be aware that not all of the software
is available on the client product.
For example,
MySQL I don't think is a default
part of the client product.
If you end up using that,
keep in mind that you're limiting
yourself to the server product.
Darwin is a distribution that we do of
the low levels of the operating system.
That's our kernel, most of the drivers,
all the user land,
the low-level libraries.
We provide that in
source and binary form.
We usually try to get that
out about the same time as we
get out our major releases.
So you're able to get
at all the source code,
pretty much, of the low level.
This ends up being a viable
development platform if you're used
to a traditional UNIX environment.
Pretty much everything that
you're used to is there.
Third-party software is provided as
ports from a couple of different places.
The Fink project,
which is hosted on SourceForge,
they have several hundred
projects that they've ported over,
and they provide Debian
packages that you can install
on your OS X or Darwin system.
This is interesting from
the perspective of porting,
basically because there are
a lot of examples there.
If you have an application
similar to something that has
already been ported by Fink,
you can take a look at
how they've done it.
We're also working on
our own infrastructure,
which is going to be available on the
opendarwin.org site sometime soon.
Keep a look for it in
the next week or so.
File system portability issues.
Some of these are general issues.
Some of them are specific to OS X.
POSIX file systems are
normally case sensitive.
Probably any UNIX operating
system you've worked on has had
a case sensitive file system.
Sparse files, although not universal,
are available on some operating
systems so that you can create very
large files that are zero-filled,
and then as you actually
write the blocks of data,
those get filled in on the disk,
and it doesn't end up taking
a lot of space overall.
So you could create a two-terabyte file,
sparsely fill it, and only end up using a
few megabytes of space.
Keep in mind that although
our UFS file system does that,
our HFS Plus file system does not.
So HFS Plus is case-sensitive.
That case-sensitive file system
doesn't really cause as many
problems as you might think,
but there are a few gotchas.
One of them is,
say that you have a build system
where you would have a make file,
and you would type make,
and then you would type make install
to actually install the software.
Well, a lot of the GNU software,
as an example,
has an all-capitals install
file in its top-level directory.
And so you type make install,
and it tells you that
the file is up to date.
Not ideal.
Basically what happens there is that
the file make is looking for the
install file to see if it's up to date,
and it finds it.
It tried all lowercase install,
and the operating system,
the file system, said, yeah, it's there.
So there are a couple
of ways around that.
You can create a .phony
target in your make file.
You can move the file aside.
It's not that big of a deal,
but it's a pretty surprising result
if you don't realize what's going on.
Another thing that you cannot do,
you cannot have, for example,
a capital M make file and a lowercase
m make file in the same directory,
because they're treated as the same
file with the HFS Plus file system.
HFS Plus also has resource forks.
This is something that we're not really,
it's kind of a legacy thing.
We're not really using it that much.
It's something to be
aware that it exists.
When you're moving files around,
if you're trying to
preserve somebody's data,
you might need to be aware that the
resource forks actually exist there.
Hard links are not supported
by all the file systems.
UFS supports them.
HFS Plus, after a fashion, supports them.
There's some trickery that goes on behind
the scenes to actually make that work.
From an external perspective,
it effectively does the right thing.
But there are other file
systems like MS-DOS,
ISO 9660.
If you need your
software to run on those,
keep in mind that you're not going
to have hard links in every case.
Okay, and at this point,
Dave is going to come out,
and we should have plenty
of time for Q&A at the end,
so keep your questions.
ready?
[Transcript missing]
Also in Mac OS X,
we have something we call
the two-level namespace.
What that means is that your
application or your library,
whatever you're building,
has every one of its symbols that
it uses that it doesn't provide.
What library provides that is
recorded in your application.
So, for example,
if you use Sturcat from LibSystem,
it's recorded in your library
that Sturcat comes from LibSystem.
So in that case,
if one of the other libraries that
you use starts providing a Sturcat,
you won't get the wrong Sturcat.
You get the one you know
you were linked against.
This can provide a problem, though,
for legacy UNIX developers
who rely on what the inverse
of a two-level namespace is,
is the flat namespace.
So, for example, if you want to override
the malloc libraries,
malloc, free, realloc, et cetera,
and you want every library to
take advantage of those symbols,
you need to compile your
application differently,
and that's through the dash flat
underscore namespace compiler flag,
and that'll provide you, again,
with a flat namespace.
Amen.
Also, due to our Next heritage,
where dynamic-- dynamicism
is heavily encouraged,
static linking is seldom
used in the system and,
in fact, is heavily discouraged.
You'll find it very hard to find
a .a file anywhere on the system,
so get used to dynamicism.
Also, in Jaguar,
we've added Mac OS 9-style weak symbols.
Weak symbols are a way for-- at runtime
to determine if a library is available.
So, for example,
if you need some function
called foo from some library,
you can just say if foo,
and if foo is non-null,
you can then use foo.
And by testing the-- for
symbols for non-zero,
you can know whether or not the
symbol is available for use.
Frameworks is the,
frameworks are bundles.
They're basically everything you think
of as a library is now a framework.
The one that the BSD team deals with
the most is lib system and that's
your traditional UNIX libraries as
both Ernie and Jason have covered.
It covers lib C, lib M.
It used to cover lib curses
under PUMA and previous systems.
That's been broken out now into a
separate library for performance
reasons and compatibility reasons.
And there are a few other
scattered libraries that you can
probably think of that are in
Other runtime issues.
Configuration resource files.
Open directory is the preferred way from
Apple to store your system preferences.
Today,
that'll back into a NetInfo database
for local system information.
For personal user information,
CF/NS preferences is the way to go.
The preferences files will actually
end up in your home directory/library/
and David In the case of startup
items and scripts and whatnot,
the old BSD way of just etc,
rc and whatnot and static scripts
doesn't scale for a dynamic system
like Mac OS X where users just want
to drag startup items to their system.
So considering that,
they live somewhere different.
They're in system library startup items.
They're bundle-based,
but they're not real CFBundles.
And they're composed of an executable
and a property list or a plist.
This property list contains
dependency and provides information
to allow our runtime startup
system to determine when to launch
startup items in the correct order.
It also allows for determining
parallelism so that potentially some,
you know,
two network services could start
up at the same time to potentially
increase -- improve startup time.
More runtime issues.
Pre-binding.
Pre-binding is an optimization technique
to make applications launch faster.
What it involves is taking all the
symbols that an application uses
that are provided by libraries and
pre-computing the location the libraries
will load at in your address space.
This allows for increased
better launch times because no
computation needs to be done.
It also provides decreased memory
usage because less memory is used.
The one con, though,
that many UNIX people might
run into is that it modifies
your executables and libraries.
This consequently confuses some
applications such as backup and
security tools like Tripwire.
Having all your programs change every
time you update a library is kind of
annoying from a Tripwire perspective.
The other important thing to note
is our bin SH is now bash in Jaguar.
It was Zish.
Those of you that are good
script writers won't notice.
Portable scripts won't have a problem.
But there were,
as we discovered during the transition,
there were a few Zishisms that crept
in that bad people made mistakes.
But that was -- you good
people won't have that problem.
On to the topic of frameworks
to get into more detail.
It's a bundle-based alternative
to the UNIX hierarchy,
so you'll find things in the
paths that are listed there.
It contains the libraries and the
headers and potentially different
versions of the same library,
too, for compatibility's sake.
It potentially contains other
resources such as sounds,
pictures, anything you can think of
that a library might need.
In a typical UNIX system,
you would find these in user, share,
or some directory.
Frameworks can live in
the following locations.
There's system library frameworks
for the things that Apple provides.
There's library frameworks for the
things the system administrator installs.
There's network library frameworks
for kind of a network-wide location.
There's your home directory yourself
if you want to personally install
a framework for your own apps.
And applications that need a
framework can also install an
application inside-- a framework
inside their application bundle,
since applications are
bundles themselves.
On the topic of authentication
and authorization,
Apple's preferred framework
is the security framework.
It provides a capability and rights-based
system for users to control the ability
to do things in a secure manner.
We do provide PAM for a portability sake.
If you need to port
your application to 10,
you can call PAM.
And what PAM does is just quickly
call into the security framework.
It's just a thin shim.
In the case of the
development environment,
we are mostly GNU toolchain.
This includes GCC, GDB, Make.
The GNU binutils is not there.
We've got a very heavily
modified version of it that it's
basically not the same anymore.
In the case of the C preprocessor,
we have a technology
called precompiled headers.
Precompiled headers provides a
massive speed improvement for
C++ and Objective-C applications,
but negligible speed
improvement for C applications.
And considering that the bulk
of Apple's developers are C++
and Objective-C developers,
we decided to optimize for their case.
This can create a problem, though,
that our C preprocessor that understands
precompiled headers does not understand
some of the GNU C preprocessor extensions
that some of you might be using.
So you might need to use
the --no-cpp-precomp flag
to get your code to compile.
We also have the lovely project builder
and interface builder that you can find
out more about at the rest of the show.
But it provides a GUI editing environment
for not only taking your legacy projects,
like in project builder,
and using our GUI editors
and tools there.
But it also provides a GUI editing
environment for not only
taking your legacy projects,
like in project builder,
and using our GUI editors
and tools there,
but also for the application.
And we have a lot of great
tools out there that we can
use to build our project.
And we have a lot of
great tools out there.
In the case of the C preprocessor,
we have a lot of great tools out there.
But if you want to build GUI apps, too,
you can use our interface builder
to design your GUI in a GUI,
which is a novelty for
the Unix developers.
API considerations.
We do not have pull.
It would break binary compatibility,
and we consider binary compatibility
very important for our customers.
Pthreads is partially implemented,
but if you find a problem,
please let us know.
It is an ever-evolving suite of APIs,
and they're getting
better with each release.
:Asynchronous I/O is missing,
but we do have P-read and P-write.
This allows for multiple threads to
read and write from files without
creating a lock around the L-seq call.
OpenSSL is available,
but CDSA is preferred for implementing
encryption and secure transport of data.
There's a good reason for this, too,
is that CDSA can abstract-- Well,
in the case of OpenSSL,
keys are handled directly by
the library in the application,
and that's just not
always possible sometimes.
Sometimes your key might
be on a hardware device,
such as a token or some
off-board or PCI device.
And with OpenSSL,
that simply doesn't work.
We also have Objective-C in the system.
It's--if some of you have ever
dealt with a small talk language,
it's very similar.
If you want to start diving
into GUI applications,
such as Objective-C--COCO,
you will be able--you will
need to learn Objective-C.
It just takes a day.
It's not hard.
And it's really nice, in fact.
Also, in the case of lib tool,
we actually had a tool called lib tool.
We had it first.
So in the case of the GNU lib tool,
we've called it glib tool.
And that's just something to
run into when you type lib
tool from the command line.
Also,
in the case of mockifying your code,
sometimes the POSIX APIs might
fail you and you need to
drop down to the Mach APIs.
We hope that doesn't happen,
but if it does, please let us know.
But some things to be aware of is
fine-grained control over process
priority in the case of real time.
You might need to use the Mach APIs.
In the case of bootstrap ports,
it's a Mach concept,
you might find that if you're daemonizing
yourself on a pre-Jaguar system,
that your bootstrap port
is--no longer works.
And that was an implementation
detail that kind of broke daemon's
launch from a GUI context.
So you might need to be careful
about which context you launch your
daemons from or directly deal with
the Mach bootstrap port situation.
Also,
in the case of the P-Trace system call,
we basically only implement
the attached APIs.
Past that point, you need to use Mach to
control an application,
but this really shouldn't affect anybody
except GDB and possibly a few other apps.
But...
In the case--moving on to
mailing lists to contact us.
We have lists.apple.com.
There's more lists than are listed here,
but the important ones to know
about are the Apple CDSA list for
talking about our CDSA technology.
We have a Unix porting list for
those of you that want to ask
porting questions after the show.
We have a Darwin development list,
which is our kind of general forum
for the development of Darwin.
We have a Darwin OS users list.
If you're just a user and you want
to poke around and ask questions,
this is the place to go.
We have a Darwin kernel list if you want
to ask very kernel-specific questions,
like possibly about the funnel
or implementing a kernel and
networking or I/O Kit extension.
And in the case of
development of the user level,
we have a mailing list dedicated to that.
So if you're more worried
about libraries and,
you know,
bringing lib system up to date with
FreeBSD and questions about that,
that would be the list to go.
Websites, we have our premier open source
website hosted at Apple called
www.opensource.apple.com.
We have the recently
announced OpenDarwin site,
which is a community-run
website and development site
for pushing Darwin forward
from a community perspective.
And as Jason talked about earlier,
there's the Fink project for
getting ported software already,
and that's fink.sourceforge.net.
In the case of books that will help
you along in your porting efforts,
there is the UNIX for
Developers from O'Reilly.
You can find out where to get
it from our developer website,
TechPubs.
There's the Inside Macintosh
Macro Runtime Architecture,
for if you want to get even more
in detail about the Macro Runtime.
There's the additional
developer toolchain documents,
so the typical info pages and whatnot
you can get for GCC and GDB and whatnot
are available on the developer website.
For the further roadmap,
we have the Darwin Kernel
session tomorrow morning,
bright at 9:00 a.m.
We have the security session,
also in this same building, at 2:00 p.m.
tomorrow.
And we have our feedback forum
tomorrow at 3:30 in room J1 of
the main developer conference.
So who to contact if
you have some questions?
I'm Dave Zarzycki.
Jason was who was just up.
And Rob and Jordan are
going to be up for the Q&A.